What we were doing was having a lot of fun. During the day we would go swimming and have saunas, and then it was off to the studio to jam, sometimes with chemical assistance. We were staying in a funky little hotel on Miami Beach where you could score hard drugs in the gift shop by the front reception desk. You just placed your order with the girl who worked there, and you’d come back the next day and she’d hand it over to you in a brown paper bag. By this time we were doing quite a lot of different stuff: smack and coke as well as all kinds of mad stuff like PCP.
      One night our producer, Tom Dowd, told me that the Allman Brothers Band was playing the Coconut Grove and suggested that we all go down to see them. With their long, long hair and beards, the band looked amazing, and they were great musicians. I loved them, but what really blew me away was Duane Allman’s guitar playing. I was mesmerized by him. He was very tall and thin with an air of complete conviction, and although he didn’t sing, I felt sure he was the leader of the band, just by his body language. Tom introduced us to the band after the show, and we invited them back to the studio for a jam, which resulted in me asking Duane to play on the sessions while they were in town.
      Duane and I became inseparable during the time we were in Florida, and between the two of us we injected the substance into the Layla sessions that had been missing up to that point. He was like the musical brother I’d never had but wished I did; more so than Jimi, who was essentially a loner, while Duane was a family man, a brother. Unfortunately for me, he already had a family, but I loved it while it lasted. These kinds of experiences don’t happen every day, and I knew enough by then to cherish it while I could.
      Having another guitarist made our band come alive, and when Duane went back to playing with the Allman Brothers, we were never really the same again. The Dominos returned to England and carried on touring, but when we put out the album, it died because, even though word was beginning to seep out that “Derek is Eric,” I wasn’t prepared to do any press or help it in any way. I was still a real idealist in those days, and my hope was that the album would sell on its merit. It didn’t, of course, because lack of promotion meant that nobody knew it was out there. In the end, pressure from the record company on the one hand and Stigwood on the other compelled me to agree first to having “Derek is Eric” badges released to the press, and second to our promoting the album both at home and in the States.
      By the time I got back to America, my heart was no longer in the Dominos. We had scored masses of coke and smack before we left Florida and took it on tour with us. With the amount of drugs we were taking every day, I really don’t know how we got through that tour alive, and by the time we came back to England, we were all on the path to becoming full-blown addicts. Tom Dowd was so worried about me that he asked Ahmet Ertegun to come and see me. Ahmet took me aside and talked to me in a very fatherly way about how concerned he was about my drug taking. He told me all about his experiences with Ray Charles, and how painful it had been for him to watch Ray get more and more caught up in the world of hard drugs. At one point he became very emotional and started to cry. You would think that, because I can recall this with such clarity, it had some effect on me, but the fact is, it didn’t make the slightest difference. I was hell-bent on doing what I was going to do and really didn’t see it as being all that bad.
      What I didn’t realize then was—after his experiences not just with Ray but with other people in the jazz world who had gone down the drugs road and ended up dead—just how scared Ahmet was of what might happen to me. He was just doing his best to dissuade me from carrying on. Drugs were the beginning of the end for the band. We couldn’t do anything. We couldn’t work. We couldn’t agree. We were paralyzed, and this led to hostility growing among us. We attempted to make another album, but it just fell to pieces. The final straw came when Jim Gordon and I had a huge row and I stormed out of the studio in a rage. The band never played together again. Disillusioned, I retired to Hurtwood.
      This was the beginning of a period of serious decline in my life, triggered, I think, by several events. The first of these was the death of Jimi Hendrix, on September 18, 1970. Over the years, when time allowed it, Jimi and I had become good friends, spending time together in London, but particularly in New York, where we used to play a lot together in the clubs. What I found refreshing about him was his intensely self-critical attitude toward his music. He had this enormous gift and a fantastic technique, like that of someone who spent all day playing and practicing, yet he didn’t seem that aware of it. I also got to see the playboy in him. He loved to spend all night hanging out, getting drunk or stoned, and when he did pick up the guitar, it was very throwaway to him, as if he didn’t take himself too seriously.
      Though Jimi was left-handed, he always played right-handed guitars upside down, a tradition in which he was not unique. Albert King used this style, as does Doyle Bramhall II, who plays with my current band. One afternoon I was browsing through some instrument shops in the West End when I saw this white, left-handed Stratocaster, and I bought it on impulse to give to Jimi. The scene was so small then that I knew I would be seeing him that night, as I was going to a Sly and the Family Stone concert at the Lyceum and Jimi was bound to be there. I took the guitar with me to the show so that I could give it to him afterward, but he never turned up. Then the next day I heard that he had died. He had passed out, stoned on a mixture of booze and drugs, and choked on his own vomit. It was the first time the death of another musician really affected me. We had all felt obliterated when Buddy Holly died, but this was much more personal. I was incredibly upset and very angry, and was filled with a feeling of terrible loneliness.
      Six weeks later, while touring the States with the Dominos, I had a call from Stigwood telling me that my grandfather had been taken into the hospital in Guildford with suspected cancer. I flew home to see him. He was a sad figure in his hospital bed, diminished both by his illness and by a stroke he had suffered the previous year, which had left him paralyzed down one side. I felt stricken with guilt. In my arrogance, I believed that I had somehow contributed to his decline by having bought him a house and given him enough money to take early retirement. I felt that I had offended his pride by depriving him of his way of life. Of course, in reality, I was just doing what any grateful child would do, trying to pay back the love and support I had always received from him. But nevertheless, I couldn’t help feeling that I was to blame for it all. It never occurred to me that perhaps I wasn’t responsible for everything that happened in the world.
      Finally, there was my unrequited love for Pattie. I had convinced myself that when she heard the completed Layla album, with all its references to our situation, she would be so overcome by my cry of love that she would finally leave George and come away with me for good. So I called her up one afternoon and asked her if she’d like to come over for tea and listen to the new record. Of course, it was blatant emotional blackmail and doomed to failure. By this time I’d already applied quite a lot of pressure, and this was just more of the same. Having said that, the quality of the music was pure, and I really did need to share that with someone, and who better than her? Anyhow, she came over and listened, and I think she was deeply touched by the fact that I had written all these songs about her, but at the same time the intensity of it all probably scared the living daylights out of her. Needless to say, it didn’t work, and I was back at square one.
      Over the next few months I blindly kept on trying to persuade Pattie to leave George and come and live with me, but I was getting nowhere. Until one day, after another session of fruitless pleading, I told her that if she didn’t leave him, I would start taking heroin full-time. In truth, of course, I had been taking it almost full-time for quite a while. She smiled sadly at me, and I knew the game was over. Apart from one brief meeting at the London airport, that was the last time I saw her for several years.
      Clapton
      Threatening Pattie was futile and childish, but it was all bluff and had nothing to do with me actually becoming a heroin addict. It just doesn’t work that way. I have known and met many people who took just as many drugs and drank just as much booze as I did, but who never became addicted to anything. It’s a mysterious phenomenon. Besides that, I would never have deliberately set about going down this road because, since my days with Cream, I had had a healthy regard for the perils of smack. Ginger had often lectured me like an older brother, threatening that if he ever found out I was using heroin, he would have my balls, and I believed him.
      I just assumed I was in some way immune to it and that I wouldn’t get hooked. But addiction doesn’t negotiate, and it gradually crept up on me, like a fog. For a year or so I thoroughly enjoyed it, taking it pretty infrequently, while indulging in lots of coke and other drugs as well as drinking. Then suddenly, from taking it every two weeks, it was once, then twice or three times a week, then once a day. It was so insidious, it took over my life without my really noticing.
